.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=========================================================
KVMI - The kernel virtual machine introspection subsystem
=========================================================

The KVM introspection subsystem provides a facility for applications running
on the host or in a separate VM, to control the execution of any running VMs
(pause, resume, shutdown), query the state of the vCPUs (GPRs, MSRs etc.),
alter the page access bits in the shadow page tables (only for the hardware
backed ones, eg. Intel's EPT) and receive notifications when events of
interest have taken place (shadow page table level faults, key MSR writes,
hypercalls etc.). Some notifications can be responded to with an action
(like preventing an MSR from being written), others are mere informative
(like breakpoint events which can be used for execution tracing).
With few exceptions, all events are optional. An application using this
subsystem will explicitly register for them.

The use case that gave way for the creation of this subsystem is to monitor
the guest OS and as such the ABI/API is highly influenced by how the guest
software (kernel, applications) sees the world. For example, some events
provide information specific for the host CPU architecture
(eg. MSR_IA32_SYSENTER_EIP) merely because its leveraged by guest software
to implement a critical feature (fast system calls).

At the moment, the target audience for KVMI are security software authors
that wish to perform forensics on newly discovered threats (exploits) or
to implement another layer of security like preventing a large set of
kernel rootkits simply by "locking" the kernel image in the shadow page
tables (ie. enforce .text r-x, .rodata rw- etc.). It's the latter case that
made KVMI a separate subsystem, even though many of these features are
available in the device manager (eg. QEMU). The ability to build a security
application that does not interfere (in terms of performance) with the
guest software asks for a specialized interface that is designed for minimum
overhead.

API/ABI
=======

This chapter describes the VMI interface used to monitor and control local
guests from a user application.

Overview
--------

The interface is socket based, one connection for every VM. One end is in the
host kernel while the other is held by the user application (introspection
tool).

The initial connection is established by an application running on the
host (eg. QEMU) that connects to the introspection tool and after a
handshake the file descriptor is passed to the host kernel making all
further communication take place between it and the introspection tool.

The socket protocol allows for commands and events to be multiplexed over
the same connection. As such, it is possible for the introspection tool to
receive an event while waiting for the result of a command. Also, it can
send a command while the host kernel is waiting for a reply to an event.

The kernel side of the socket communication is blocking and will wait
for an answer from its peer indefinitely or until the guest is powered
off (killed), restarted or the peer goes away, at which point it will
wake up and properly cleanup as if the introspection subsystem has never
been used on that guest (if requested). Obviously, whether the guest can
really continue normal execution depends on whether the introspection
tool has made any modifications that require an active KVMI channel.

Handshake
---------

Although this falls out of the scope of the introspection subsystem, below
is a proposal of a handshake that can be used by implementors.

Based on the system administration policies, the management tool
(eg. libvirt) starts device managers (eg. QEMU) with some extra arguments:
what introspection tool could monitor/control that specific guest (and
how to connect to) and what introspection commands/events are allowed.

The device manager will connect to the introspection tool and wait for a
cryptographic hash of a cookie that should be known by both peers. If the
hash is correct (the destination has been "authenticated"), the device
manager will send another cryptographic hash and random salt. The peer
recomputes the hash of the cookie bytes including the salt and if they match,
the device manager has been "authenticated" too. This is a rather crude
system that makes it difficult for device manager exploits to trick the
introspection tool into believing its working OK.

The cookie would normally be generated by a management tool (eg. libvirt)
and make it available to the device manager and to a properly authenticated
client. It is the job of a third party to retrieve the cookie from the
management application and pass it over a secure channel to the introspection
tool.

Once the basic "authentication" has taken place, the introspection tool
can receive information on the guest (its UUID) and other flags (endianness
or features supported by the host kernel).

In the end, the device manager will pass the file descriptor (plus
the allowed commands/events) to KVM. It will detect when the socket is
shutdown and it will reinitiate the handshake.

Unhooking
---------

During a VMI session it is possible for the guest to be patched and for
some of these patches to "talk" with the introspection tool. It thus
becomes necessary to remove them before the guest is suspended, moved
(migrated) or a snapshot with memory is created.

The actions are normally performed by the device manager. In the case
of QEMU, it will use another ioctl to notify the introspection tool and
wait for a limited amount of time (a few seconds) for a confirmation that
is OK to proceed (the introspection tool will close the connection).

Live migrations
---------------

Before the live migration takes place, the introspection tool has to be
notified and have a chance to unhook (see **Unhooking**).

The QEMU instance on the receiving end, if configured for KVMI, will need
to establish a connection to the introspection tool after the migration
has been completed.

Obviously, this creates a window in which the guest is not introspected.
The user has to be aware of this detail. Future introspection technologies
can choose not to disconnect and instead transfer the necessary context
to the introspection tool at the migration destination via a separate
channel.

Memory access safety
--------------------

The KVMI API gives access to the entire guest physical address space but
provides no information on which parts of it are system RAM and which are
device-specific memory (DMA, emulated MMIO, reserved by a passthrough
device etc.). It is up to the user to determine, using the guest operating
system data structures, the areas that are safe to access (code, stack, heap
etc.).
